In a monolithic system, tracking a request is simple — you have one log file and one flow.
But in microservices, a single user request might touch 20+ services — and debugging what happened where becomes a nightmare.
Distributed Tracing helps you follow that request as it hops across services, like a detective tracking its full journey.
It answers:
	• Where did the request start?
	• Which services did it pass through?
	• Where did latency or error occur?

Think about ordering pizza online:
	1. You place an order (frontend app).
	2. The request goes to:
		○ Payment Service
		○ Kitchen Service
		○ Delivery Service
	3. You can track every stage: “Order confirmed → Baking → Out for delivery → Delivered.”
If something goes wrong (e.g., “stuck in kitchen”), you can pinpoint exactly which step failed.
That’s exactly what Distributed Tracing does for microservices.

Why It’s Needed (The Problem)
In a microservices architecture:
	• Each service logs independently.
	• Logs are stored in different containers/pods.
	• A single request might go through:

API Gateway → Auth Service → User Service → Payment → Notification

If a user says “Payment failed,” without tracing you’ll spend hours stitching together logs manually.
Distributed tracing solves this by assigning a unique trace ID to every request — and that ID follows it end-to-end.

How Distributed Tracing Works (Step-by-Step)
Let’s break down a real flow 
Step 1: Generate a Trace ID
When a user sends a request (say POST /checkout), the API Gateway creates a unique Trace ID — like TRACE12345.

Step 2: Propagate the ID
That trace ID is added to HTTP headers (like X-B3-TraceId, X-B3-SpanId, or traceparent if using OpenTelemetry).
Each service that handles the request:
	• Reads the Trace ID
	• Adds its own Span (representing that service’s operation)
	• Passes the same Trace ID downstream

Step 3: Collect Traces
Each span (service log) is sent asynchronously to a Tracing System (like Jaeger, Zipkin, or AWS X-Ray).

Step 4: Visualize the Request Path
The tracing system visualizes it like a timeline waterfall chart:

User Request (TRACE12345)
├── API Gateway (10ms)
├── Auth Service (40ms)
│    └── DB Query (20ms)
├── Payment Service (250ms) ⚠️
└── Notification Service (50ms)

You can instantly see that Payment Service caused the slowdown.

Let’s take Netflix Checkout Flow (simplified):

1. User clicks "Pay Now"
2. API Gateway creates Trace ID
3. Auth → Payment → Email → Logging

Each microservice logs:
{
  "traceId": "abc123",
  "spanId": "payment-service-1",
  "service": "payment",
  "latency": 235
}
In UI, engineers see a single trace view showing latency breakdown by service.
That’s how Netflix or Uber quickly debug slowdowns in production — without sifting through 50 containers’ logs.

Core Components
Component	Purpose
Trace ID	Unique identifier for full request
Span	A single operation (e.g., DB query, API call)
Context Propagation	Passing the trace info through headers
Tracer Agent	Collects trace data locally
Collector / Storage	Aggregates all traces
UI (e.g., Jaeger/Zipkin)	Visualizes end-to-end flow

Frontend
  ↓
API Gateway → [Trace ID generated]
  ↓
User Service → Auth Service → Payment Service → Notification
  ↓
Jaeger/Zipkin Collector → Storage → Dashboard (Visualization)

Each arrow carries the same Trace ID
Each service logs its span
Combined trace gives you the full story
